This project aims at constructing a scheduling system for the courses which are held at an academic institution through the use of genetic algorithm.
The scheduling problem is a well-known combinatorial search problem that consists of scheduling tasks over a period of time. The tasks (courses) being scheduled are subject to the availability of 3 resources – Room, Time and lecturer, also are subject to certain constrains –e.g. a lecturer cannot attend more than one course at the same time).
The time frame of the system is one week as equal to the academic week, Sunday to Thursday - 8:00 AM to 10:00 PM and Friday – 8:00 AM to 15:00, therefore time is a limited resource where class rooms are becoming available when the lecture which held in that room is over, and then it’s free to occupy a new lecture – thus class rooms are renewable resource. A weekly scheduling of tasks and resources is called “Time table”.
Parallel tasks scheduling problems using a renewable resources is known as a NP-COMPLETE problem, where one of the main challenges of this problem is the duration of time required to solve it using a naïve algorithm while numerous tasks, resources and special constraints are required in a particular instance of that problem – Genetic algorithms are a search technique inspired by evolutionary biology. A population of solutions is maintained and managed through the use of genetic operators – selecting some solutions that are better than others, combining them and modifying them. The process is executed in a continuous iterative manner, and as time progresses better solutions are found. The heuristics of genetic algorithm in this project is modified to match the problem of scheduling a time table.